# Logical Systems Review

# Boolean Algebra

- Only two possible values: `0` (false, low) and `1` (true, high).
- Three fundamental operations:
    - conjunction: `^`.
    - disjunction: `v`.
    - negation: `~`.
- In practice, we can consider two additional values: `don't care` and `high-Z`.

# Logic Gates

## NOT

- Outputs the inverse of its input.
- Truth table:
    - `~(0) = 1`
    - `~(1) = 0`

## AND

- Outputs the conjunction of its input.
- Truth table:
    - `(0) ^ (0) = 0`
    - `(1) ^ (0) = 0`
    - `(0) ^ (1) = 0`
    - `(1) ^ (1) = 1`

## OR

- Outputs the disjunction of its input.
- Truth table:
    - `(0) ^ (0) = 0`
    - `(1) ^ (0) = 1`
    - `(0) ^ (1) = 1`
    - `(1) ^ (1) = 1`

## XOR

- Outputs the exclusion of its input.
- Truth table:
    - `(0) ^ (0) = 0`
    - `(1) ^ (0) = 1`
    - `(0) ^ (1) = 1`
    - `(1) ^ (1) = 0`

# Combinational and Sequential Logic

## Multiplexer

Select which of its input signals is output based on some selector.

## Decoder

Usually selects one output based on the value of the input.

## Encoder

Usually outputs value based on input value or a combination of inputs.

## Latch

Stores the state of the input when there is a `0` on the gate input.

## Flip-flop

…

# Finite State Machines (FSM)

- A FSM is a control path.
- It is clocked (i.e., sequential).
- It has a number of defined *states* that it can be in.
- Transition between states are determined by the combination of the current state and the current inputs to the FSM

# Memory structures

## Memory compilers

- Synthesis tools cannot generally infer memory blocks from code.
    - Memory must be instantiated as a component.
- Models generated by vendor-specific memory compiler.
    - Not very portable: tied to a vendor.
    - Technology must be selected before models can be generated.
    - Models will need to be changed for new technology.

## Structural Organization

- Half of the address is decoded to select a whole row of *cells* in the array.
- The other half represents an individual datum.
- The data from the row propagates to the edge of the array.

## Dual Port Memory

- Memory can be designed to support two separate ports:
    - Inherently at the transistor level.
    - “Time-sliced” access to a normal memory array.
- Ports may be different:
    - Both read/write.
    - One write, one read.
- Access control is important!
    - Simultaneous access to a single location from both ports can give indeterminate behavior.

# Data Structures

## Queues (FIFO)

- First-in-first-out.
- Used as delay, queue, or. “rate buffer”.
    - Data is written sequentially at the tail of the queue.
    - Data is read sequentially from the head of the queue.
- Implemented as memory of shift registers.

## Stacks (LIFO)

- Last-in-first-out.
- Implemented with an up/down counter.
- `PUSH`: increment the counter then write.
- `POP`: read and then decrement the counter.

# Design Patterns

## Design for Testability (DFT)

### What is DFT?

- Design techniques to add testability features in integrated circuits to make it easier to apply manufacturing tests.
- It is usually done by adding a debug-signal multiplexer to the design.
    - It affects the RTL! Timing, area, and power.

### Built-in Self-Test (BIST)

- Extra logic in a design to verify all or a portion of the internal functionality.
- Also affects the RTL (timing, area, power).

### Joint Test Action Group (JTAG)

- Extra logic in a design to verify all or a portion of the internal functionality.
- Doesn't affect the RTL much.

## Low Power

- There are two sources of power consumption in CMOS ICs: static and dynamic power.
- Static power → leakage.
    - This is constant.
    - We can't do anything about this in our RTL code.
- Dynamic power → switching (on to off, or off to on).
    - Power switches causes extremely small windows of short circuits.
    - RTL can be employed to mitigate this!
    - Reducing switching to only occur when it is absolutely necessary.
        - Clock gating!